The first thing I’m going to do is configure the switches
with their names and configure the interfaces as trunks or access ports.
That means we need to configure the VLANs on the switches
as well as configure the VTP mode.
This is the console for switch 1
so, in other words, IOSvL2-1 as you can see here in this console.
I’m gonna type enable to go to privilege mode
type conf t to go to global configuration mode
and then type hostname and I can specify the name of the switch
I’m gonna configured as S1
do allows me to see show commands in global config mode as an example
so I’m gonna use the command do sh ip int brief
to view interfaces on the switch.
So I can see various interfaces such as gigabit 0/0 gigabit 0/1
and so forth which have a status of up, up at the moment.
In this topology, I’m only using gigabit 0/0
to gigabit 0/3 as well as gigabit 1/0.
So these are the interfaces that I'm using, as a best practice
I’m going to shut down any other interfaces on the switch.
So I’m gonna shutdown gigabit 1/1 - 3
my interface have gone down so do sh ip int brief
shows me that those interfaces are currently down.
I should also shutdown g2/0 - 3 as well as 3/0 - 3.
so do sh ip int brief
shows me that those interfaces are shut down
now you probably wanna script this kind of configuration
so on the other switches, I’ll do most of the configuration through notepad
and then simply paste it into the switch consoles to speed things up
but what we’ve done at this point is shut down unused interfaces
and we've name the switch.
The range command is really useful
when doing configurations on multiple interfaces
By defaults we have VLAN 1 configured as well as legacy VLANs
such as 1002, 1003, 1004 and 1005
which were used in the past for FDDI and token ring.
VLAN 1 is the only VLAN used in an Ethernet environment.
In this topology however
I need to configure VLAN 10 as well as VLAN 20.
before to configure the VLANs
I’m gonna change the VTP mode to transparent.
So that every switch uses its own local database of VLANs.
By default the VTP mode is set to server
and we can see that by using the command show vtp status.
Servers allow you to create VLANs
and they're also synchronized with other switches in the topology
I do wanna do that
so I’m gonna type VTP mode transparent
so that my switch does not try
synchronize with other switches in the topology.
In a small environment like this
we don’t really need VTP and VTP can cause a lot of problems in networks.
So for safety reasons, I’m gonna disable VTP
and the command sh vtp status
allows me to see that the mode is now changed to transparent.
The number of existing VLANs is 5
the maximum number of VLANs supported on the switches 1005
we can see the current VLANs by typing sh vlans once again
and as you can see we have VLAN 1, 1002, 1003,1004, and 1005
as the 5 VLANs currently configured.
sh vtp status
shows me that this switch supports VTP modes 1 to 3
the current version running is VTP 1.
The switch is not part of a VTP domain.
We can also see that VTP pruning
and VTP trap generations are disabled.
So sh vlan brief
shows me that I have VLAN 1 configured
and all of this ports are in VLAN 1
VLAN 1 is the default Ethernet VLAN once again
and all interfaces are by default in VLAN 1.
So conf t vlan 10 vlan 20 and sh vlan brief
now you can see that VLAN 10 and VLAN 20 have been created
and added to the list of VLANs currently available on the switch.
for port to be put into a VLAN
the VLAN needs to be added to the VLAN database
so when if I was gonna put this NPM server into VLAN 30 as an example
I would need to configure VLAN 30 and then add that port to VLAN 30.
In this example, I want to configure VLAN 10 and VLAN 20
because I’m gonna create layer 3 interfaces on this switch for those VLANs.
So I need to have configured the VLANs in the VLAN database first.